Welcome to my cumulative Final project for Digital History!

I will be discovering information using the "Digital Archive of the Guatemalan National Police Hitorical Archive" which was put together by the University of Texas from reliable resources aquired from Guatemala in order to highlight the periods of peak repression in Guatemala.

Click here to access their [Archive](https://ahpn.lib.utexas.edu/home)

When beginning my research I had minimal knowledge of the content I was going to come upon. Through my past classes at Carleton University I had done a fair amount of research on the oppression of South America but mainly the role that the United States and Canada had to play. As I begin this research journey I am open-minded and excited for what I will find!

At first glance simply looking on the website I found that they have quite a few microfilm reels as well as an expansive array of paper documents. Reading further into their suggestions about how to approach finding certain documents I realized that their search engine is not always reliable as it does not have the same power (to use their example) as Google. Knowing this I definitely used my patience. 

After working with their website I had to redirect my area of interest as the majority of their browsing leads to lists of images without consecutive URLs and after a few failed attempts to extract sets of images I was interested in I found one document set with 62 pages in it that happened to have consecutive jpeg URLs. I also chose this set of data as it was a bunch of memeos from the summer of 1977 which, based on my prior knowledge of Guatamalan politics, was a time where a lot of the police were corrupt and their police were military police. These memos were sent by Sergio Valverto Morales, Alberto de J Alvarado, Marco Antonio Rubio Scheverria, Julio Hernan Ochoa Escobar or one of the other authors who had 1 or 2 memos in this set. The memos were all meant to be 24 hour updates sent to headquarters for the police/military police at the time. Now when I first pulled up the data set I was curious to see what crimes were in these memos, I figured they would probably be some theft and speeding tickets maybe something a little more juicy but that is not what I found.

At face value the majority of these memos are very casual, a couple of the memos mention playing ball and getting coffee and for some reason these particular authors visit people in the hospital a lot. I would say the majority of the 62 memos had some mention of visiting someone in the hospital and always had the full name of the person hospitalized. Now again at face value it seems like these men were just good police, checking in one their community members. But as I translated the documents from spanish to English I started to realize this data set is missing context. The Archive did not provide any context with these images besides a one sentence explaination about these being memos between commanders and headquarters as 24 hour reports. 

After translating about half of my OCR'd documents I had a fair amount of data to make some conclusions with. 

My origional questions when beginning my research with this data was what sort of crimes were these commanders reporting on. After having cleaned up and translated the documents I found only about half of the memos contained information about crimes and it was typically handed over to local police or not described at all. There was also an overwhelming amount of memos that as I said previoulsy mentioned visits to the hospital. Most of the instances where these commanders visited the hopital, those that had been hospitalized had broken limbs or had contusions on their heads. The part of this that struck me as strange is all of these injuries were said to be from slip and fall accidents or things like playing sports. The memos had no mention of foul play involoved in these injuries so why were the commanders involved. 

The memos that did contain information about crimes were short and again did not go into detail which makes sense being it is a memo, not a report. Some of the crimes that were put in the memos were driving witout a license, protesting, insulting someone and the one that interested me most which was just listed as scandal. There was also mention in a few of the memos of vehicles being seized by poice for small reasons like not having registration in person or being parked in the wrong spot.

Again these memos did not have much in the way of context but with my prior knowledge of the social and economic climate in south America during the 70's I am able to make some early assumptions about the meaning of the content in these memo's. What I have deduced from my findings is either these commanders were not great at their jobs which is unlikely due to their staus or that they are following orders as corrupt police which was not uncommon. If they were corrupt/acting on government orders it is not unlikely that all of the hospital visits were not actually caused by accidents but caused by police brutality as a warning or some other vile reason. Another assumption I can make based on my prior knowledge and this data is that the seizure of vehicles was a very common police tactic to take vehicles away from those who were rebelling aginst the government. Although this is not what the memos say, it does make sense why they would seize upwards of vehicles in one day. 

At this time in history there was a civil war in Guatemala that lasted until 1996. The summer of 1977 was smack dab in the middle of the war and with that context I believe these memos are all talking about the corruption of the police in Guatemala and I think with some more research outside of these archives I would be able to find more information on these incidents that support that. 

Overall I feel as though my findings were mildly incomplete as these particular documents needed a lot of cleaning up before I could use any of the information in them. Because of this I was only able to gather information from about a third of the documents thus making it hard to use any of the topic modelling tools at my disposal as it would have made it hard to draw valid concluions. I would like to take some of my own time though and finish this research. 

The direction I would like to go in with the data I am collecting is to create a topic model of the crimes listed in these memos, written by whom. I would like to do some research to find more information about the commandors who wrote these memes and find out if they were a part of the corrupt police force during the civil war in Guatemala and I would like to create a time line of the ijuries they were rorting on as well as try to find some correlations between the arrests they did report and protests that had happened in guatemala.

The parallels I see between my own cycle of exploration and that of Michelle Moravec are the idea of messy data. She was working with the content of letter as I was and she had to choose between working with messy data or cleaning up everything. She chose to work off of messy data as I had due to time constraints. I think something things that are different between our cycles of exploration are the presence of multiple recipients of the letters. This is actually adventageous in my case as it allows me to focus more on the content of the memos and I have to do less deducing about why things were said to who. I like the way that she uses multiple examples of the data and what they mean which is something again I would like to do continuing on with this research. 

The last thing I would like to say about this particular set of data is that it sparked a very interesting conversation in our discord group about the advent of technology. We had a short discussion about how the majority of the technology availible to us is in Engish so those researching data from places like Guatemala or South America, or pretty much any language other than english may have trouble processing that data they need in order to do their research. A good chunk of time in my research was spent translating from Spanish to English and I found that when I OCR'd my documents there were some instances were R studio did not recognize certain special characters or words. More so than the English documents I have used in the past. This was especially surprising knowing that teh images I used were actually quite legible to begin with. 

Overall I feel as though my cycle of exploration was successful in coming to the beginning stages of answering questions and it also opened doors to answer many more!
